
10.  Recommendation G.722:

  7 kHz AUDIO-CODING WITHIN 64 KBIT/S

1.       General

1.1  Scope and outline description

  This Recommendation describes the characteristics of an audio (50 to
 7 000 Hz) coding system which may be used for a variety of higher quality
speech applications. The coding system uses sub-band adaptive differential
pulse code modulation (SB-ADPCM) within a bit rate of 64 kbit/s. The system
is henceforth referred to as 64 kbit/s (7 kHz) audio coding. In the SB
ADPCM technique used, the frequency band is split into two sub-bands (higher
and lower) and the signals in each sub-band are encoded using ADPCM. The
system has three basic modes of operation corresponding to the bit rates
used for 7 kHz audio coding:  64, 56 and 48 kbit/s. The latter two modes
allow an auxiliary data channel of 8 and 16 kbit/s respectively to be provided
within the 64 kbit/s by making use of bits from the lower sub-band.

  Figure 1/G.722 identifies the main functional parts of the 64 kbit/s
(7 kHz) audio codec as follows:

  i)  64 kbit/s (7 kHz) audio encoder comprising:

              -     a transmit audio part which converts an audio signal
to a
      uniform digital signal which is coded using 14 bits with
      16 kHz sampling;

    -    a SB-ADPCM encoder which reduces the bit rate to 64 kbit/s.  
  ii)  64 kbit/s (7 kHz) audio decoder comprising:

    -    a SB-ADPCM decoder which performs the reverse operation to the
encoder noting that the effective audio coding bit rate at the input of
the decoder can be 64, 56 or 48 kbit/s depending on the mode of operation;

    -    a receive audio part which reconstructs the audio signal from
the uniform digital signal which is encoded using 14 bits with 16 kHz sampling.

  The following two parts, identified in Figure 1/G.722 for clarification,
will be needed for applications requiring an auxiliary data channel within
the 64 kbit/s:

    -    a data insertion device at the transmit end which makes use of,
when needed, 1 or 2 audio bits per octet depending on the mode of operation
and substitutes data bits to provide an auxiliary data channel of 8 or
16 kbit/s respectively;

    -    a data extraction device at the receive end which determines the
mode of operation according to a mode control strategy and extracts the
data bits as appropriate.
  ss 1.2 contains a functional description of the transmit and receive
audio parts, ss 1.3 describes the modes of operation and the implication
of inserting data bits on the algorithms, whilst ssss 1.4 and 1.5 provide
the functional descriptions of the SB-ADPCM encoding and decoding algorithms
respectively. ss 1.6 deals with the timing requirements. ss 2 specifies
the transmission characteristics of the 64 kbit/s (7 kHz) audio codec and
of the transmit and receive audio parts, ssss 3 and 4 give the principles
of the SB- ADPCM encoder respectively whilst ssss 5 and 6 specify the computatio
nal details of the Quadrature Mirror Filters (QMF) and of the ADPCM encoders
and decoders respectively.

  Networking aspects and test sequences are addressed in Appendices I and
II respectively to this Recommendation.

  Recommendation G.725: "Systems aspects for the use of the 7 kHz audio
codec within 64 kbit/s" contains specifications for in-channel handshaking
procedures for terminal identification and for mode control strategy, including
interworking with existing 64 kbit/s PCM terminals.

1.2  Functional description of the audio parts

  Figure 2/G.722 shows a possible arrangement of audio parts in a 64 kbit/s
(7 kHz) audio coding terminal. The microphone, pre-amplifier, power amplifier
and loudspeaker are shown simply to identify the audio parts and are not
considered further in this Recommendation.

  In order to facilitate the measurement of the transmission characteristics
as specified in ss 2, test points A and B need to be provided as shown.
These test points may either be for test purposes only or, where the audio
parts are located in different units from the microphone, loudspeaker etc...,
correspond to physical interfaces.

  The transmit and receive audio parts comprise either the following functional
units or any equivalent items satisfying the specifications of ss 2:  

  i)  transmit:

    -  an input level adjustment device,
    -  an input anti-aliasing filter,
    -  a sampling device operating at 16 kHz,
    -  an analogue-to-uniform digital converter with 14 bits and       with
16 kHz sampling;

  ii)  receive:

    -  a uniform digital-to-analogue converter with 14 bits and       with
16 kHz sampling,
    -  a reconstructing filter which includes x/sin x correction,
    -  an output level adjustment device.

1.3  Possible modes of operation and implications of inserting data

  The three basic possible modes of operation which correspond to the bit
rates available for audio coding at the input of the decoder are defined
in Table 1/G.722.

  TABLE 1/G.722
  
  Basic possible modes of operation

ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÂÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÂÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿

³    Mode   ³  7 kHz audio coding bit rate  ³ Auxiliary data channel bit
rate ³
ÃÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÅÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÅÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ´

³     1     ³           64 kbit/s           ³            0 kbit/s     
      ³
³     2     ³           56 kbit/s           ³            8 kbit/s     
      ³
³     3     ³           48 kbit/s           ³           16 kbit/s     
      ³
ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

  See Appendix 1 for examples of applications using one or several of these
modes and for their corresponding subjective quality.

  The 64 kbit/s (7 kHz) audio encoder uses 64 kbit/s for audio coding at
all times irrespective of the mode of operation. The audio coding algorithm
has been chosen such that, without sending any indication to the encoder,
the least significant bit or two least significant bits of the lower sub
band may be used downstream from the 64 kbit/s (7 kHz) audio encoder in
order to substitute the auxiliary data channel bits. However, to maximize
the audio performance for a given mode of operation, the 64 kbit/s (7 kHz)
audio decoder must be optimized to the bit rate available for audio coding.
Thus, this Recommendation describes three variants of the SB-ADPCM decoder
and, for applications requiring an auxiliary data channel, an indication
must be forwarded to select in the decoder the variant appropriate to the
mode of operation. Figure 1/G.722 illustrates the arrangement. It should
be noted that the bit rate at the input of the 64 kbit/s (7 kHz) audio
decoder is always 64 kbit/s but comprising 64, 56 or 48 kbit/s for audio
coding depending on the mode of operation. From an algorithm viewpoint,
the variant used in the SB-ADPCM decoder can be changed in any octet during
the transmission. When no indication about the mode of operation is forwarded
to the decoder, the variant corresponding to Mode 1 should be used.

  A mode mismatch situation, where the variant used in the 64 kbit/s (7
kHz) audio decoder for a given octet does not correspond to the mode of
operation, will not cause misoperation of the decoder. However, to maximize
the audio performance, it is recommended that the mode control strategy
adopted in the data extraction device should be such as to minimize the
duration of the mode mismatch. Appendix I gives further information on
the effects of a mode mismatch. To ensure compatibility between various
types of 64 kbit/s (7 kHz) audio coding terminals, it is recommended that,
as a minimum, the variant corresponding to Mode 1 operation is always implemente
d in the decoder.

  The mode control strategy could be derived from the auxiliary data channel
protocol (see draft Recommendation G.725).

1.4  Functional description of the SB-ADPCM encoder

  Figure 3/G.722 is a block diagram of the SB-ADPCM encoder. A functional
description of each block is given below in ssss 1.4.1 to 1.4.4.

1.4.1  Transmit quadrature mirror filters (QMFs)

  The transmit QMFs comprise two linear-phase non-recursive digital filters
which split the frequency band 0 to 8 000 Hz into two sub-bands: the lower
sub-band (0 to 4 000 Hz) and the higher sub-band (4 000 to 8 000 Hz). The
input to the transmit QMFs, xin, is the output from the transmit audio
part and is sampled at 16 kHz. The outputs, xL and xH, for the lower and
higher sub-bands respectively, are sampled at 8 kHz.

1.4.2  Lower sub-band ADPCM encoder

  Figure 4/G.722 is a block diagram of the lower sub-band ADPCM encoder.
The lower sub-band input signal, xL after subtraction of an estimate, sL,
of the input signal produces the difference signal, eL. An adaptive 60
level non-linear quantizer is used to assign six binary digits to the value
of the difference
signal to produce a 48 kbit/s signal, IL.

  In the feedback loop, the two least significant bits of IL are deleted
to produce a 4-bit signal ILt, which is used for the quantizer adaptation
and applied to a 15-level inverse adaptive quantizer to produce a quantized
difference signal, dLt. The signal estimate, sL is added to this quantized
difference signal to produce a reconstructed version, rLt, of the lower
sub-band input signal. Both the reconstructed signal and the quantized
difference signal are operated upon by an adaptive predictor which produce
the estimate, sL, of the input signal, thereby completing the feedback
loop.

  4-bit operation, instead of 6-bit operation, in the feedback loops of
both the lower sub-band ADPCM encoder, and the lower sub-band ADPCM decoder
allows the possible insertion of data in the two least significant bits
as described in ss 1.3 without causing misoperation in the decoder. Use
of a 60- level quantizer (instead of 64-level) ensures the pulse density
requirements as described in Recommendation G.802 are met under all conditions
and in all modes of operation.

1.4.3  Higher sub-band ADPCM encoder

  Figure 5/G.722 is a block diagram of the higher sub-band ADPCM encoder.
The higher sub-band input signal, xH after subtraction of an estimate,
sH, of the input signal, produces the difference signal, eH. An adaptive
4-level non- linear quantizer is used to assign two binary digits to the
value of the difference signal to produce a 16 kbit/s signal, IH.

  An inverse adaptive quantizer produces a quantized difference signal,
dH, from these same two binary digits. The signal estimate, sH, is added
to this quantized difference signal to produce a reconstructed version,
rH, of the higher sub-band input signal. Both the reconstructed signal
and the quantized difference signal are operated upon by an adaptive predictor
which produces the estimate, sH, of the input signal, thereby completing
the feedback loop.

1.4.4  Multiplexer

  The multiplexer (MUX) shown in Figure 3/G.722 is used to combine the
signals, IL and IH, from the lower and higher sub-band ADPCM encoders respective
ly into a composite 64 kbit/s signal, I, with an octet format for transmission.

  The output octet format, after multiplexing, is as follows:

  IH1 IH2 IL1 IL2 IL3 IL4 IL5 IL6

where IH1 is the first bit transmitted, and where IH1 and IL1 are the most
significant bits of IH and IL respectively, whilst IH2 and IL6 are the
least significant bits of IH and IL respectively.

1.5  Functional description of the SB-ADPCM decoder

  Figure 6/G.722 is a block diagram of the SB-ADPCM decoder. A functional
description of each block is given below in ssss 1.5.1 to 1.5.4.

1.5.1  Demultiplexer

  The demultiplexer (DMUX) decomposes the received 64 kbit/s octet- formatted
signal, Ir, into two signals, ILr and IH, which form the codeword inputs
to the lower and higher sub-band ADPCM decoders respectively.

1.5.2  Lower sub-band ADPCM decoder

  Figure 7/G.722 is a block diagram of the lower sub-band ADPCM decoder.
This decoder can operate in any of three possible variants depending on
the received indication of the mode of operation.

  The path which produces the estimate, sL, of the input signal including
the quantizer adaptation, is identical to the feedback portion of the lower
sub- band ADPCM encoder described in ss 1.4.2. The reconstructed signal,
rL, is produced by adding to the signal estimate one of three possible
quantized difference signals, dL,6, dL,5 or dL,4 (= dLt - see note), selected
according to the received indication of the mode of operation. For each
indication, Table 2/G.722 shows the quantized difference signal selected,
the inverse adaptive quantizer used and the number of least significant
bits deleted from the input codeword.

  TABLE 2/G.722
  
  Lower sub-band ADPCM decoder variants

ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÂÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÂÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÂÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿

³   Received     ³    Quantized     ³    Inverse     ³   Number of least
   ³
³  indication    ³    difference    ³    adaptive    ³   significant bits
  ³
³  of mode of    ³      signal      ³    quantizer   ³  deleted from input
 ³
³  operation     ³     selected     ³      used      ³     codeword, ILr
   ³
ÃÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÅÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÅÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÅÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ´
³    Mode 1      ³       dL,6       ³    60-level    ³          0     
     ³
³    Mode 2      ³       dL,5       ³    30-level    ³          1     
     ³
³    Mode 3      ³       dL,4       ³    15-level    ³          2     
     ³
ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

Note - For clarification purposes, all three inverse quantizers have been
indicated in the upper portion of Figure 7/G.722. In an optimized implementation
, the signal dLt, produced in the predictor loop, could be substituted
for dL,4.

1.5.3  Higher sub-band ADPCM decoder

  Figure 8/G.722 is a block diagram of the higher sub-band ADPCM decoder.
This decoder is identical to the feedback portion of the higher sub-band
ADPCM encoder described in ss 1.4.3, the output being the reconstructed
signal, rH.

1.5.4  Receive QMFs

  The receive QMFs shown in Figure 6/G.722 are two linear-phase non- recursive
digital filters which interpolate the outputs, rL and rH, of the lower
and higher sub-band ADPCM decoders from 8 kHz to 16 kHz and which then
produce an output, xout, sampled at 16 kHz which forms the input to the
receive audio parts.

  Excluding the ADPCM coding processes, the combination of the transmit
and the receive QMFs has an impulse response which closely approximates
a simple delay whilst, at the same time, the aliasing effects associated
with the 8 kHz sub-sampling are cancelled.
1.6  Timing requirements

  64 kHz bit timing and 8 kHz octet timing should be provided by the network
to the audio decoder.

  For a correct operation of the audio coding system, the precision of
the 16 kHz sampling frequencies of the A/D and D/A converters must be better
than + 50.10-6.

2.  Transmission characteristics

2.1  Characteristics of the audio ports and the test points

  Figure 2/G.722 indicates the audio input and output ports and the test
points (A and B). It is for the designer to determine the characteristics
of the audio ports and the test points (i.e. relative levels, impedances,
whether balanced or unbalanced). The microphone, pre-amplifier, power amplifier
and loudspeaker should be chosen with reference to the specifications of
the audio parts: in particular their nominal bandwidth, idle noise and
distortion.

  It is suggested that input and output impedances should be high and low,
respectively, for an unbalanced termination whilst for a balanced termination
these impedances should be 600 ohms. However, the audio parts should meet
all audio parts specifications for their respective input and output impedance
conditions.

2.2  Overload point

  The overload point for the analogue-to-digital and digital-to-analogue
converters should be + 9 dBmO + 0.3 dB. This assumes the same nominal speech
level (see Recommendation G.232) as for 64 kbit/s PCM but with a wider
margin for the maximum signal level which is likely to be necessary with
conference arrangements. The measurement method of the overload point is
under study.

2.3  Nominal reference frequency

  Where a nominal reference frequency of 1 000 Hz is indicated below, the
actual frequency should be chosen equal to 1 020 Hz. The frequency tolerance
should be +2 to -7 Hz.

2.4  Transmission characteristics of the 64 kbit/s (7 kHz) audio codec

  The values and limits specified below should be met with a 64 kbit/s
(7 kHz) audio encoder and decoder connected back-to-back. For practical
reasons, the measurements may be performed in a looped configuration as
shown in Figure 9a/G.722. However, such a looped configuration is only
intended to simulate an actual situation where the encoder and decoder
are located at the two ends of a connection.

  These limits apply to operation in Mode 1.

2.4.1  Nominal bandwidth

  The nominal 3 dB bandwidth is 50 to 7 000 Hz.

2.4.2  Attenuation/frequency distortion

  The variation with frequency of the attenuation should satisfy the limits
shown in the mask of Figure 10/G.722. The nominal reference frequency is
1 000 Hz and the test level is -10 dBmO.

2.4.3  Absolute group delay

  The absolute group delay, defined as the minimum group delay for a sinewave
signal between 50 and 7 000 Hz, should not exceed 4 ms. The test level
is  -10 dBmO.

2.4.4  Idle noise

  The unweighted noise power measured in the frequency range 50 to 7 000
Hz with no signal at the input port (test point A) should not exceed -66
dBmO. When measured in the frequency range 50 Hz to 20 kHz the unweighted
noise power should not exceed -60 dBmO.

2.4.5  Single frequency noise

  The level of any single frequency (in particular 8 000 Hz, the sampling
frequency and its multiples), measured selectively with no signal at the
input port (test point A) should not exceed -70 dBmO.

2.4.6  Signal-to-total distortion ratio

  Under study.

2.5  Transmission characteristics of the audio parts

  When the measurements indicated below for the audio parts are from audio
to-audio, a looped configuration as shown in Figure 9b/G.722 should be
used. The audio parts should also meet the specifications of ss 2.4 with
the measurement configuration of Figure 9b/G.722.

2.5.1  Attenuation/frequency response of the input anti-aliasing filter

  The in-band and out-of-band attenuation/frequency response of the input
anti-aliasing filter should satisfy the limits of the mask shown in Figure
11/G.722. The nominal reference frequency is 1 000 Hz and the test level
for the in-band characteristic is -10 dBmO. Appropriate measurements should
be made to check the out-of-band characteristic taking into account the
aliasing due to the 16 kHz sampling.

2.5.2  Attenuation/frequency response of the output reconstructing filter

  The in-band and out-of-band attenuation/frequency response of the output
reconstructing filter should satisfy the limits of the mask shown in Figure
12/G.722. The nominal reference frequency is 1 000 Hz and the test level
for the in-band characteristic is -10 dBmO. Appropriate measurements should
be made to check the out-of-band characteristic taking into account the
aliasing due to the 16 kHz sampling. The mask of Figure 12/G.722 is valid
for the whole of the receive audio part including any pulse amplitude modulation
distortion and x/sin x correction.

2.5.3  Group delay distortion with frequency

  The group delay distortion, taking the minimum value of group delay as
a reference, should satisfy the limits of the mask shown in Figure 13/G.722.
2.5.4  Idle noise for the receive audio part

  The unweighted noise power of the receive audio part measured in the
frequency range 50 to 7 000 Hz with a 14-bit all-zero signal at its input
should not exceed -75 dBmO.

2.5.5  Signal-to-total distortion ratio as a function of input level

  With a sine wave signal at a frequency excluding simple harmonic relationships
with the 16 kHz sampling frequency, applied to test point A, the ratio
of signal-to-total distortion power as a function of input level measured
unweighted in the frequency range 50 to 7 000 Hz at test point B, should
satisfy the limits of the mask shown in Figure 14/G.722. Two measurements
should be performed, one at a frequency of about 1 kHz and the other at
a frequency of about 6 kHz.

2.5.6  Signal-to-total distortion ratio as a function of frequency

  With a sine wave signal at a level of -10 dBmO applied to test point
A,
the ratio of signal-to-total distortion power as a function of frequency
measured unweighted in the frequency range 50 to 7 000 Hz at test point
B should satisfy the limits of the mask shown in Figure 15/G.722.

2.5.7  Variation of gain with input level

  With a sine wave signal at the nominal reference frequency of 1 000 Hz,
but excluding the sub-multiple of the 16 kHz sampling frequency, applied
to test point A, the gain variation as a function of input level relative
to the gain at an input level of -10 dBmO measured selectively at test
point B, should satisfy the limits of the mask shown in Figure 16/G.722.

2.5.8  Intermodulation

  Under study.

2.5.9  Go/return crosstalk

  The crosstalk from the transmit direction to the receive direction should
be such that, with a sine wave signal at any frequency in the range 50
to 7 000 Hz and at a level of +6 dBmO applied to test point A, the crosstalk
level measured selectively at test point B should not exceed -64 dBmO.
The measurement should be made with a 14-bit all-zero digital signal at
the input to the receive audio part.

  The crosstalk from the receive direction to the transmit direction should
be such that, with a digitally simulated sine wave signal at any frequency
in the range of 50 to 7 000 Hz and a level of +6 dBmO applied to the input
of the receive audio part, the crosstalk level measured selectively and
with the measurement made digitally at the output of the transmit audio
part should not exceed  -64 dBmO. The measurement should be made with no
signal at test point A, but with the test point correctly terminated.

2.6  Transcoding to and from 64 kbit/s PCM

  For compatibility reasons with 64 kbit/s PCM, transcoding between 64
kbit/s (7 kHz) audio coding and 64 kbit/s PCM should take account of the
relevant specifications of Recommendations G.712, G.713 and G.714. When
the audio signal is to be heard through a loudspeaker, more stringent specificat
ions may be necessary. Further information may be found in Appendix 1.
3.  SB-ADPCM encoder principles

  A block diagram of the SB-ADPCM encoder is given in Figure 3/G.722. Block
diagrams of the lower and higher sub-band ADPCM encoders are given respectively
in Figures 4/G.722 and 5/G.722.

  Main variables used for the descriptions in ssss 3 and 4 are summarized
in Table 3/G.722. In these descriptions, index (j) indicates a value correspondi
ng to the current 16 kHz sampling interval, index (j-l) indicates a value
corresponding to the previous 16 kHz sampling interval, index (n) indicates
a value corresponding to the current 8 kHz sampling interval, and index
(n-l) indicates a value corresponding to the previous 8 kHz sampling interval.
Indices are not used for internal variables, i.e. those employed only within
individual computational blocks.

3.1  Transmit QMF

  A 24-coefficient QMF is used to compute the lower and higher sub-band
signal components. The QMF coefficient values, hi, are given in Table 4/G.722.

  The output variables, xL(n) and xH(n), are computed in the following
way:

  xL(n) = xA + xB                                               (1)

        xH(n) = xA - xB                                              
(2)

where
             11
  xA =  ş h2i.xin(j - 2i)                                       (3)
             i=0

             11
  xB =  ş h2i+1.xin(j - 2i - 1)                                 (4)
             i=0

3.2  Difference signal computation

  The difference signal, eL(n) and eH(n), are computed by subtracting predicted
values, sL(n) and sH(n), from the lower and higher sub-band input values,
xL(n) and xH(n):

  eL(n) = xL(n) - sL(n)                                         (5)

  eH(n) = xH(n) - sH(n)                                         (6)
  TABLE 3/G.722
  
  Variables used in the SB-ADPCM encoder and decoder descriptions

Note - Variables used exclusively within one section are not listed. Subscripts
L and H refer to lower sub-band and higher sub-band values. Subscript Lt
denotes values generated from the truncated 4-bit codeword as opposed to
the nontruncated 6-bit (encoder) or 6-/5-/ or 4-bit (decoder) codewords.

  TABLE 4/G.722
  
  Transmit and receive QMF coefficient values

3.3  Adaptive quantizer

  The difference signals, eL(n) and eH(n), are quantized to 6 and 2 bits
for the lower and higher sub-bands respectively. Tables 5/G.722 and 6/G.722
give the decision levels and the output codes for the 6- and 2-bit quantizers
respectively. In these tables, only the positive decision levels are indicated,
the negative levels can be determined by symmetry. mL and mH are indices
for the quantizer intervals. The interval boundaries, LL6, LU6, HL and
HU, are scaled by computed scale factors, şL(n) and şH(n) (see ss 3.5).
Indices, mL and mH, are then determined to satisfy the following:

  LL6(mL).şL(n) ó eL(n) < LU6(mL).şL(n)                      (7)

  HL(mH).şH(n) ó eH(n) < HU(mH).şH(n)                        (8)

for the lower and higher sub-bands respectively.

  The output codes, ILN and IHN, represent negative intervals, whilst the
output codes, ILP and IHP, represent positive intervals. The output codes,
IL(n)  and IH(n), are then given by:

                  Ú ILP(mL) , if eL (n) ò 0
  IL (n) =  ´                                                (9)
                  À ILN(mL) , if eL (n) < 0
                   

            Ú IHP(mH) , if eH (n) ò 0
        IH (n) =  ´                                                (10)
                  À IHN(mH) , if eH (n) < 0
                   

for the lower and higher sub-bands respectively.
3.4  Inverse adaptive quantizers

3.4.1  Inverse adaptive quantizer in the lower sub-band ADPCM encoder

  The lower sub-band output code, IL(n), is truncated by two bits to produce
ILt(n). The 4-bit codeword, ILt(n), is converted to the truncated quantized
difference signal, dLt(n), using the QL4-1 output values of Table 7/G.722,
and scaled by the scale factor, şL(n):

  dLt(n) = QL4-1(ILt(n)).şL(n).sgn(ILt(n))                   (11)

where sgn (ILt(n)) is derived from the sign of eL(n) defined in equation
9.

  There is a unique mapping, shown in Table 7/G.722, between four adjacent
6-bit quantizer intervals and the QL4-1 output values. QL4-1(ILt(n)) is
determined in two steps: first determination of the quantizer interval
index, mL, corresponding to IL(n) from Table 5/G.722, and then determination
of
QL4-1(mL) by reference to Table 7/G.722.

3.4.2  Inverse adaptive quantizer in the higher sub-band ADPCM encoder

  The higher sub-band output code, IH(n) is converted to the quantized
difference signal, dH(n), using the Q2-1 output values of Table 8/G.722
and
scaled by the scale factor, şH(n):

  dH(n) = Q2-1(IH(n)).şH(n).sgn(IH(n))                       (12)
  TABLE 5/G.722
  
  Decision levels and output codes for the 6-bit lower sub-band quantizer

Note - If a transmitted codeword for the lower sub-band signal has been
transformed, due to transmission errors to one of the four suppressed codewords
"0000XX", the received code word is set at "111111".
  
  TABLE 6/G.722
  
  Decision levels and output codes for the 2-bit higher sub-band quantizer
                               
               ÚÄÄÄÄÂÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÂÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÂÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÂÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
               ³ mH ³    HL   ³    HH    ³  IHN   ³   IHP    ³
               ÃÄÄÄÄÅÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÅÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÅÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÅÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ´
               ³ 1  ³    0    ³ 1.10156  ³  01    ³   11     ³
               ³    ³         ³          ³        ³          ³
               ³ 2  ³ 1.10156 ³    ì     ³  00    ³   10     ³
               ÀÄÄÄÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
  TABLE 7/G.722
  
  Output values and multipliers for 6, 5 and 4-bit lower sub-band     
                           inverse quantizers

  TABLE 8/G.722
  
  Output values and multipliers for the 2-bit higher sub-band quantizer

                         ÚÄÄÄÄÄÂÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÂÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
                         ³ mH  ³   Q2-1    ³    WH    ³
                         ÃÄÄÄÄÄÅÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÅÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ´
                         ³ 1   ³  0.39453  ³ -0.10449 ³
                         ³     ³           ³          ³
                         ³ 2   ³  1.80859  ³  0.38965 ³
                         ÀÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
where sgn (IH(n)) is derived from the sign of eH(n) defined in equaltion
(10), and where Q2-1(IH(n)) is determined in two steps: first determine
the quantizer interval index, mH, corresponding to IH(n) from Table 6/G.722
and then determine Q2-1(mH) by reference to Table 8/G.722.

3.5  Quantizer adaptation

  This block defines şL(n) and şH(n), the scaling factors for the lower
and higher sub-band quantizers. The scaling factors are updated in the
log domain and subsequently converted to a linear representation. For the
lower sub- band, the input is ILt(n), the codeword truncated to preserve
the four most significant bits. For the higher sub-band, the 2-bit quantizer
output, IH(n), is used directly.

  Firstly the log scaling factors, şL(n) and şH(n), are updated as follows:

         L(n) = B. L(n-1)öWL(ILt(n-1))                              (13)

         H(n) = B. H(n-1)öWH(IH(n-1))                               (14)

where WL(.) and Wy(.) are logarithmic scaling factor multipliers given
in Tables 7/G.722 and 8/G.722, and B is a leakage constant equal to 127/128.

  Then the log scaling factors are limited, according to:

        0 ó  L(n) ó 9                                               (15)

        0 ó  H(n) ó 11                                              (16)

  Finally, the linear scaling factors are computed from the log scaling
factors, using an approximation of the inverse log2 function:

        şL(n) = 2( L(n)ö2)şmin                                      (17)

        şH(n) = 2 H(n)şmin                                          (18)

where şmin is equal to half the quantizer step size of the 14 bit analogue
to- digital converter.

3.6  Adaptive prediction

3.6.1  Predicted value computations

  The adaptive predictors compute predicted signal values, sL(n) and sH(n),
for the lower and higher sub-bands respectively.

  Each adaptive predictor comprises two sections: a second-order section
that models poles, and a sixth-order section that models zeroes in the
input signal.

  The second order pole sections (coefficients aL,i and aH,i) use the quantized
reconstructed signals, rLt(n) and rH(n), for prediction. The sixth order
zero sections (coefficients bL,i and bH,i) use the quantized difference
signals, dLt(n) and dH(n). The zero-based predicted signals, sLz(n) and
sHz(n), are also employed to compute partially reconstructed signals as
described in ss 3.6.2.

4.  SB-ADPCM decoder principles

  A block diagram of the SB-ADPCM decoder is given in Figure 6/G.722 and
block diagrams of the lower and higher sub-band ADPCM decoders are given
respectively in Figures 7/G.722 and 8/G.722.

  The input to the lower sub-band ADPCM decoder, ILr, may differ from IL
even in the absence of transmission errors, in that one or two least significant
bits may have been replaced by data.

4.1  Inverse adaptive quantizer

4.1.1  Inverse adaptive quantizer selection for the lower sub-band ADPCM
  decoder

  According to the received indication of the mode of operation the number
of least significant bits which should be truncated from the input codeword
ILr, and the choice of the inverse adaptive quantizer are determined, as
shown in Table 2/G.722.

  For operation in mode 1, the 6-bit codeword, ILr(n), is converted to
the quantized difference, dL(n), according to QL6-1 output values of Table
7/G.722, and scaled by the scale factor, şL(n):

  dL(n) = QL6-1(ILr(n)).şL(n).sgn (ILr(n))                        (39)

where sgn (ILr(n)) is derived from the sign of IL(n) defined in equation
(9).

  Similarly, for operations in mode 2 or mode 3, the truncated codeword
(by one or two bits) is converted to the quantized difference signal, dL(n),
according to QL5-1 or QL4-1 output values of Table 7/G.722 respectively.

  There are unique mappings, shown in Table 7/G.722, between two or four
adjacent 6-bit quantizer intervals and the QL5-1 or QL4-1 output values
respectively.

  In the computations above, the output values are determined in two steps:
first determination of the quantizer interval index, mL, corresponding
to ILr(n) from Table 5/G.722, and then determination of the output values
corresponding to mL by reference to Table 7/G.722.

  The inverse adaptive quantizer, used for the computation of the predicted
value and for adaptation of the quantizer and predictor, is described in
ss 3.4.1, but with IL(n) replaced by ILr(n).

4.1.2  Inverse adaptive quantizer for the higher sub-band ADPCM decoder

  See ss 3.4.2.

4.2  Quantizer adaptation

  See ss 3.5.

4.3  Adaptive prediction

4.3.1  Predicted value computation

  See ss 3.6.1.

4.3.2  Reconstructed signal computation

  See ss 3.6.2.

  The output reconstructed signal for the lower sub-band ADPCM decoder,
rL(n), is computed from the quantized difference signal, dL(n), as follows:

  rL(n) = SL(n) + dL(n)                                       (40)

4.3.3  Pole section adaptation

  See ss 3.6.3.

4.3.4  Zero section adaptation

  See ss 3.6.4.

4.4  Receive QMF

  A 24-coefficient QMF is used to reconstruct the output signal, xout(j),
from the reconstructed lower and higher sub-band signals, rL(n) and rH(n).
The QMF coefficient values, hi, are the same as those used in the transmit
QMF and are given in Table 4/G.722.

  The output signals, xout(j) and xout(j+1), are computed in the following
way:

                                                                    (41)

                                                                    (42)

                                                                    (43)

                                                                    (44)

  Attenuation/frequency response of the input
  antialiasing filter

  Attenuation/frequency response of the output
  reconstructing filter (including x/sinx correction)

  Signal-to-total distortion ratio as a 
  function of frequency

5.  Computational details for QMF

5.1  Input and output signals

  Table 9/G.722 defines the input and output signals for the transmit and
receive QMF. All input and output signals have 16-bit word-lengths, which
are limited to a range of -16384 to 16383 in 2's complement notation. Note
that the most significant magnitude bit of the A/D output and the D/A input
appears at the third bit location in XIN and XOUT, respectively.

5.2  Description of variables and detailed specification of sub-blocks

  This section contains a detailed expansion of the transmit and receive
QMF. The expansions are illustrated in Figures 17/G.722 and 18/G.722 with
the internal variables given in Table 10/G.722, and the QMF coefficients
given in Table 11/G.722. The word-lengths of the internal variables, XA,
XB and WD, must be equal to or greater than 24 bits (see Note 1). The other
internal variables have a minimum of 16 bit word-lengths. A brief functional
description and the full specification is given for each sub-block.

  The notations used in the block descriptions are as follows:

  >>n      denotes an n-bit arithmetic shift right operation (sign     
  extension),

  +      denotes arithmetic addition with saturation control which     
  forces the result to minimum or maximum representable value        
in case of underflow or overflow, respectively,

