
                    VFEdit Professional Prompt Editor


Contents:

    The DLGVFE3D.ZIP file contains a demonstration and evaluation version
    of VFEdit(R), the Professional Prompt Editor.

    VFEdit (vee-ef-edit, short for Voice File Edit) is a program that lets 
    you edit sound the way a word processor lets you edit text. A word 
    processor lets you to cut, copy, insert, replace, and re-arrange 
    written words. VFEdit lets you do the same thing with spoken words 
    - and a lot more.
    
    You speak into a microphone and record your words. VFEdit then converts 
    your words and music (plus and anything else you may want to add) into 
    something you can actually see and use. VFEdit shows you what sound 
    looks like. The basic reason to use VFEdit is that you simply want your 
    audio presentations to sound good - just as you want your written 
    presentations to look good. 

    VFEdit supports Record and Playback using any Windows compatible sound 
    board, Dialogic compatible telephony card, and even works with the 
    PC Speaker driver.

    If you develop for voice processing, or if you only change, fix, and 
    improve your voice prompts, you'll find VFEdit just about indispensable. 
    Satisfying. Fun, too!

To Unpack:
    
    1)  Unzip the file DLGVFE3D.ZIP to extract each floppy image:
        PKUNZIP DLGVFE3D.ZIP
    2)  Unzip the disk images to floppy using the create directory option: 
        PKUNZIP -d VFE001.ZIP a:
        PKUNZIP -d VFE002.ZIP a:
        PKUNZIP -d VFE003.ZIP a:
    3)  Run the Setup program, and enter the demo serial number 
        "0000.0000.0000" (without the double quotes)


Other VISI Products:

    Don't forget to ask about our other exciting products:
    
    Audio ToolBox converts to and from pure & indexed files, 
        Microsoft Multimedia Wave (8, 16, MS ADPCM), linear 16 
        and unsigned 8 bit, plus Dialogic 4 and 8 bit. Convert 
        files recorded at 22 KHz, 11KHz, 8KHz and 6Khz - and 
        provides filters for proper re-sampling.

    TI/F DLL (tif-dee-el-el), The Microsoft Windows Voice
        Mail Driver, lets you add Voice Mail power to your
        Microsoft Windows applications.

    VoxFonts, the "Software Only" Text-to-Speech adds an
        unlimited vocabulary to your Interactive Voice
        Response applications.
    
    Scribe, The DOS Speech to Text Transcription Utility,
        lets you hear digital audio files without the need
        for additional hardware. It's like turning your PC
        into a transcription machine.
